Let's go, bro.
Let's go.
[Applause]
[Music]
Good, bro. You ready?
>> Five reps.
[Music]
>> Let's go.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]
Here
we go.
[Music]
Praise God. You know you got it.
That's amazing. One more. Here we
[__] go. One more.
Stand up. Stand up. Stand up.
[Music]
Sick. Thanks, brother. Thank you,
brother.
[Music]
Good. One and done. That's what I like
about these top set situations. So, top
set, back down set. It's stressful to
lift heavy. So, that's why I've changed
the format of my videos. So, I don't do
much talking during my my warm-ups to my
top set because it's damn stressful. And
now that that's done, I can just relax.
The goal was five. It was hard for sure.
I wanted to do a set of five and make it
look like there was a rep in reserve. I
don't know if there was a rep in reserve
on that one. That last rep felt pretty
damn tough. Gun to my head, maybe I
would have. Just as well, there's no
guns in anyone's heads when we train,
but that's good. Last week, I did 240
for six. This week, 250 for five. And
then the goal is 260 for four next week.
Now, bit of a debrief on that set.
definitely felt tension on my leg where
where I tore it uh probably close to 3
months ago now. It held of course, but
it's still on my mind. If Alex wasn't
behind me, um you know, maybe I would
have put that bar down. So, it's helpful
to have someone stronger than you
telling you you can do it. You know what
I mean? So, I was having this discussion
about motivation and being psyched up,
you know, pre-lift arousal or or
training arousal versus competition
arousal. And there's a bit of a
discussion on mindset with training
versus mindset with competition and if
you should be training in that psyched
up state or a highly aroused state every
time you train. Of course, there's no
black and white answer, but I know that
some people like to have their training
sessions where they don't psych
themselves up because I'll tell you
right now, it's really fatiguing. So,
psyching yourself up to that point is
very helpful. So, for me to do that set,
I'm not sure what you can see from the
camera, but I need to be really, really
focused because if not, that weight will
just feel like it's a ton on my back and
I probably wouldn't have performed like
that. So, I really, really need to step
up. But a lot of people have this
thought process, which I quite like,
where they have non-syched up sessions
where they kind of lift heavy, but not
to the point where they're in the same
level of focus what I was doing. So,
what happens there is you're not able to
lift as heavy. But the upside for that
is you recover a lot quicker because
you're not pushing your nervous system
to those heights. So for this, when I'm
doing these big sessions, I do need to
factor in recovery. So not just within
the session, but also within the week.
Monday I'm going to be deadlifting. This
is Friday. Tomorrow I've got to do bench
press. So those are the negatives for
coming in and really pushing it on those
sessions is the accumulated fatigue
throughout the week as well as through
the session. But either way, so what was
my state of arousal just then? It was
pretty high. And the motivation was also
high. I turned the music up. So I've
been doing a lot of videos where I do no
music. And I consider that like a bit of
a a low motivating low arousal kind of
session. This one it's like, no, I I
didn't want to uh risk anything. So, you
know, I did everything right. I had the
music on. I had Alex uh just so that you
know Alex if you don't know who that is
Alex Godly Strong Simon in his second
ever competition in powerlifting he
became the all-time world record hold
Australian record holder in powerlifting
in Australia so he totaled uh 1082.5
Alex what was your total
>> 77
>> 10 1 7 107.5
yeah 1077.5 in his second ever
competition you know and he did more
than that in training so he squatted 435
deadlifted 382 2, is that right? 382 and
and bench pressed 260. Since then, he's
bench pressed 280 in training. He's also
deadlifted 400. So, you know, the
numbers that you pull up on comp day can
be different to what you do in training.
But anyway, when someone that strong's
behind you and they're saying, "Keep
going, keep going." You kind of get
motivated to keep on going. So, that was
very, very helpful. Anyway, so right now
it's time for some back down work.
>> Did you coach Alex for the competition?
>> Yeah, I coached Alex for the
competition. I've been Alex has been on
our team for over a decade, I would say.
Yeah, that's right. Because I met him
when he was 18 and he's now 31. So,
we've been on the same team for over a
decade.
>> End of 2014.
>> End of 2014. There you go. So, it's uh
11 years coming up to 11 years. So,
yeah, fair bit of history. You know,
it's always good to have the right
people around when you're doing things
like this. Uh which I'm very fortunate
to have. So, now I'm going to be doing
back down sets. Now, here's the thing.
My programs have been chopping and
changing a lot based on how they make me
feel. You know, I write them out and
it's like, all right, it looks good in
theory, it looks good on paper, but then
when I put it in practice, it's like,
ah, it's not working. So, last week I
did sumo deadlifts and I'm supposed to
be doing my paused high bar squats after
my deadlift day. So, I've been
separating it and it didn't work. So, it
just felt terrible after that after my
sumo deadlift day. So, I did leg press
instead. So, now my consideration is to
do those squats. That's probably my
favorite squat pattern for muscle
building and also for strength building.
So, that's not the best strength
building squat pattern. Strange thought,
but it's the technique that allows you
to shift the heaviest loads, but it's
not the biggest strength builder. I
think high bar squats are superior for
building strength and building muscle,
even though they don't allow you to lift
as heavy. And then the stiletto squat is
kind of a version down from a high bar
squat. And the reason I'm choosing that
over the high bar squat is because a
high bar squat I could lift heavier
weight. Therefore, it's a little bit
more fatiguing and I've already done the
heavy weight thing, the heavy fatigue
thing. So, now what I want to do is
complement it with a variation that puts
me in a position where I just can't lift
as heavy. That's what my back down work
is going to be. So, yep, only one set of
low bar. Here's another consideration.
Low bar squats are extremely demanding
on your shoulders and your arms and your
elbows. Some people get I call it penis
elbow. So, I say it hurts your arms so
much that you feel it in your penis.
Even if you don't have a penis, it
doesn't discriminate. So people say,
"How do I get rid of that?" And for me,
it's it's not just a mobility thing.
I've seen people with incredible
shoulder mobility and they come in their
low bar squat and they get excruciating
arm pain the next day. So it's not a
mobility thing. I think it's a technical
thing as well as a conditioning thing.
So when I say technical, the more you
hold the weight on your arms, the more
you're going to feel it on your arms. So
what do I mean by that? The technique
that I have with a low bar squat is to
position the barbell on my rear deltoids
and I grab the bar and I pull my elbows
back and down. That that movement, the
action of pulling the elbows back,
squeeze the shoulder blades together,
which increases the muscular activation
around your upper back, the thoracic
spine, and stops your upper back from
rounding forward. But it also makes your
big rear deltoids pop out, which is the
shelf for that barbell to sit on. So if
it's resting on the rear delts and not
the arms, it's taking strain off the
arms, right? So if you're not resting it
on your rear delts, some people go a
little bit lower than that. In those
instances, you're resting a lot of that
weight on your arms, right? So you get a
lot of arm pain. So for me, one, it's
resting it on the right position, which
is on top of the rear delts, and not on
your arms. Two, conditioning. So getting
used to that. I've been squatting with
the low bar for many, many years, and
I'll tell you right now, I used to get
excruciating pain in the elbows. Some of
you may know exactly what I'm talking
about. A lot of you will. Some of you
may not. When I first started doing low
bar squats after a few weeks or a few
months, I started getting a lot of the
arm pain during bench press. And I used
to blame the bench press for the pain
that I was getting in my upper arms. It
was like, "Oh, bench press is just
killing me." So, I would keep squatting
heavy. And then I'd back off on my bench
press day saying, "This bench press is
no good. It's hurting me." And it took
me a while to realize that it was
actually the squats pain exactly on the
arms. For me, it's the brachiialis. So
the brachiialis. So there's the bicep.
The bicep is the muscle that everyone
flexes. It's the muscle that sits
directly underneath the bicep is the
brachiialis. So when a lot of people say
my elbows are sore, my biceps or
whatever it is, I come in and I push
with my thumb. Not overly aggressive.
You don't have to. I'm not trying to be
a dick. I just press into it just to
demonstrate to them that that's where
the trigger point is. And a lot of the
times that's where they jump. That is
the brachiialis. Now here's the next
interesting concept. There's a few
lifters that I know that have broken
their upper arm bones. They're humorous.
One person, I don't know him personally,
but he did a bench press and snapped it
during the bench press. Now, digging up
a little bit of history on that event
where he was doing spotto presses and it
just went snap. And there was a bit of a
history that that fellow had
pre-existing stress fractures in his
humorus. If I could put my money on
anything, it would be that the squats
cause the stress fractures. The next
person is a fellow by the name of Sir
Dave. He's one of the best deadlifterss,
one of the best powerliffters on the
planet. and he currently is recovering
from a broken humorous which I believe
happened during a bench press but then
he re he he got it pinned. He got, you
know, nails put in it, whatever it is,
screws put in it and during his
recovery, he came to a uh heavy low bar
squat and just holding the bar just went
snap and his upper arm broke again. And
in my opinion, it's not the bench press
that causes that pain, it's the low bar
squats and holding it in the wrong
position. So what is the right position?
It's on top of your rear delts and pull
the elbows back. Now, a lot of people
might say, "Don't pull the elbows back.
That causes you to tip forward." It's
elbows down is the cue. You are right
and you're also wrong. It's elbows back
and down. The elbows back component is
upper back rigidity. So, that's midback
muscles activating around your thoracic
spine and stopping it from folding
forward. So, if you round in your upper
back when you squat, try pulling your
elbows back. And then the next component
is elbows down. The elbows down
component is how we activate our lats.
The lats attach at the front of the arm
here and they come underneath and they
attach to the top of your pelvis. They
cross the longest distance of your spine
of all of our core muscles. Yes, that's
right. The lats are a core muscle as
well as your abs and obliques and all
the erectus spine. A lats in my opinion
are the strongest supporter of your
spine. So, if you fear that you're
falling forward during your squats,
drive those elbows down. That's lats,
but they both go hand in hand. Elbows
back for midback and and activating rear
delts. to position the barbell on that
shelf and then elbows down for lats. And
that's the ultimate upper back or entire
back rigidity strategy that you should
be doing straight away. Anyway, right
now I'm sure I'm cooling down, but
that's fine. I'm going to rewarm up
again and I'm going to do my favorite
stiletto squats. Yes. So, that was a low
bar squat. That's my strongest squat
position is a low bar squat. And the
idea of a stiletto squat is to target
the quadriceps. Now, the best way to
position your body. So, that low bar
squat, yeah, I used my quads, but it
wasn't a fantastic quad builder because
I used more of my hips. So, whenever you
see someone's torso tip forward, it's
not a bad thing. It just means you're
using your strong hips. Whenever you see
someone's knees coming forward and that
torso is upright, that's an indicator
that the muscles that you're
prioritizing are the quadriceps. So, I'm
using this exercise to prioritize my
quadriceps. So therefore, I'm going to
position my body in the best way to do
that and that is high bar. So whenever
you see me do a stiletto squat, of
course there's exceptions to every rule,
but in general you could safely say that
the idea of it is to hit quads when you
want to hit quads and you're wondering
what position to place the barbell. High
bar squat. Now there's a caveat to this
because not everybody has the mobility
and body structure to effectively squat
with a high bar position. What do I mean
by that? I guess you could say in
general people with Jesus almost lost
the foot. People that have, you hear
people say long femur, so there's more
to it than just long femur, but the
upper thigh bone is usually not the best
suited for a squat. So you look in the
Olympics, most Olympic highle athletes
have short femurss, and that allows them
to position their bodies with a more
upright torso. And those people
typically build more quadriceps when
they squat. The longer the feur, the
more the torso needs to tip forward.
Now, combine that with a short torso,
right? You got to tip forward even
further. And then combine that with poor
ankle mobility, right? So, some people
have all of that. And if that's you,
then I would say that the high bar squat
is probably going to be one of those
squat patterns that you're just never
ever going to like. And if there was a
squat pattern that you would like, it
would be a low bar variation. So, put a
blanket statement and say, if you want
more quads, you have to do high bar.
Yeah. But some of you may not have the
orthopedic profile to position yourself
to squat with a high bar and get
yourself in the right position, which is
more upright, more knee bend, more quad
dominant. And if that's the case, what's
my intervention for you? See this heel
elevation? That's the intervention. So
that's going to allow you to maximize
knee bend, maintain more upright torso,
and position yourself in a way to hit
your quads a little bit better. So I'm
going to rewarm up again. A little bit
cold from all that talking, but it's
okay. I quite like that. I like a little
bit of an interlude in my session. And
what I'm going to do now is rewarm up.
So, the last time I did this, it was 160
kg for two sets of six. Uh, so I guess
logically I'd go a little bit heavier
than that. Not sure what. This isn't
like max testing or anything like that.
This is just to complement my main work.
So, it's a variation of one of my
favorite programming styles, which is
top set back down set method. Now, the
beauty of a top set back down set method
is exactly what I've discussed, which is
where it's a great way of managing
fatigue. So, what do I mean by that?
When you got to do multiple top sets of
that super heavy weight, damn, it's
fatiguing, huh?
Nice and easy. Nice and easy. So, the
last thing I want to do after I did a
really heavy set of squats is more
really heavy stuff. Do you know what I'm
saying? So, you got a few options. One,
I used to think I used to write programs
where it was kind of like, you know,
three, three or five, three to five sets
of five. And the first set was just
like, oh man, that was so hard. How am I
going to get the rest of this out? And
as I got stronger and stronger, was
lifting heavier and heavier weights,
that became more and more fatiguing and
less practical. So now something that
I've observed with my high level
athletes is the stronger you are, less
sort of volume you should be performing.
So, a lot of the times whenever I'm
doing heavy squats or deadlifts and even
bench press with my super super strong
athletes, one to two top sets, um, and
then lots of back down work. So, what's
the point of doing all that? So, the
point of doing that is if all you do is
just one or two top sets, it's not
really enough volume. Like, you still
need some amount of volume to continue
to adapt with things like muscle
hypertrophy, which is building muscle,
which contributes to strength, right?
Right? So, you get to a point where you
understand the technique, your movement
efficiency is just so great. It's like
you can't lift heavier weights by
continuing to improve technique. Your
technique is good enough. So, where do
you improve? Well, you get to the point
where the best way to improve is to
continue to build more muscle, right?
So, this is why with my strength
building, I'm always factoring in muscle
building for long-term progression. So
therefore, upset, back down set, the top
set is in aid of keeping the body
conditioned and keeping on refining your
skill of lifting heavy weights because
strength is a skill. But then the back
down work is in aid of accumulating more
volume, but not so much that it's
fatiguing and so fatiguing that it's
interfering with your strength
progression. So it's a bit of a sweet
spot, which is why my top set back down
set protocols are top set RP. So you saw
that was RP 9.5 or whatever. That was a
high RP. I don't want to do set after
set of that high RP. So I would say top
set 8 to 10 RP back down set 6 to 8 RP.
So today oh man after all that ah I
don't even want to work to an 8 RPA but
you know getting a little bit more
volume in is absolutely wise. All right
next set. So this isn't a set. This is
warming up. This is a feel set. I think
my top set's going to be 170 for six
high bar. So this is upper traps for
high bar.
So, that was 120. Um, yeah, I think 170
is a reasonable top set today. I'm going
to do one more warm-up set. So chuck on
an extra 25 kg which will make it 145
and then we'll do
the first work set. So I'll just do a
single rep. You know now I can talk. Do
you know what I'm saying? So this is the
whole idea of like you know highly
aroused sessions. So I'm not highly
aroused anymore. I don't need to be.
This is back down work. This is nice way
to train. This is more enjoyable. The
first set was not that enjoyable. It's
enjoyable when it's done. It's like got
it. That's my joy in training. It's not
actually, you know, the anxiety before
the session and and everything that you
saw. It's once I've done it, looking
back going, "Yes, I did that." It's like
now all week I'm going to be thinking
about next week's top set, which is 260
kg for four reps. Right? So now I got to
think about how am I going to eat well,
sleep well, do all of the right things
to put myself in a position where 260
for four, like I'm able to progress to
260 for four because it's not always
linear progression. So, just because I
did last week to 40 for 6, this week to
50 for five, like you set yourself up in
a way to logically be able to hit those
numbers, but you cannot predict your
levels of energy. You're off, Alexander.
Thank you very much, my brother, for
being here. No interruption at all.
Thank you, bro.
>> Tomorrow.
>> I will be. Adam Bishop's coming. One of
the best 12 strong men. Yeah.
Okay.
A little bit fatigued, let me tell you.
I'm just going to do one more set of
that and then um
and then hamstring curls. And that's me
for the session.
Yeah. You know, here's the rules of what
makes an exercise a good choice to build
muscle.
Number one, the muscle that you're
targeting needs to be the limiting
factor of the movement, or in other
words, needs to be the first muscle that
fails, the reason why you can't do any
more reps. So, when I do that exercise,
it's like it's pretty much you can
really feel that the quads are the
reason why that's getting harder. So,
I'm really pushing with my quads.
Whereas, when I did my low bar squat, I
don't know which muscle was contributing
to those last few reps being much more
difficult. So, it's like, and if I
failed any more reps, which muscle was
it that failed first? I don't know.
Maybe my soul. I don't know if that's a
muscle. I don't even know if I have a
soul. Maybe not. But with that exercise,
I could tell that my quadriceps was the
biggest contributor to that weight
coming up. Of course, you need to have a
lot of upper body strength, core
strength, stabilizer, heavy weight,
which is why a lot of bodybuilders will
favor things like machines like a hack
squat, leg press over free weight
exercises like barbells. Because when
you're holding barbells, you need a lot
of your neural energy
on holding the barbell on your spine.
It's high axial load, highly fatiguing.
But what's the difference
with building muscle for a powerlifter
or a strength athlete versus building
muscle for a bodybuilder?
Building muscle for a strength athlete
or a powerlifter needs to have carryover
to the end goal, which is to be able to
squat.
So a high bust stiletto squat builds
quads. It's a really great choice of
exercise for quadriceps that has a great
carryover to your squat strength because
you still have to stabilize the barbell
and balance in space. Whereas machine, I
don't want to say it has no carryover to
your ability to squat heavy weight. If
you do leg press as a powerlifter,
you're doing the right thing, but
objectively leg press probably leg press
or hack squat probably has the edge on
building muscle. Stiletto squat has the
edge on building muscle specific to
powerlters who want to build their squat
as well, which is me. I'm a powerlifter.
I want to build my squat even though I
don't powerlift anymore. Even though I
don't compete anymore, you know, just it
is absolutely a skill component and in
coordinating your body and core to
handle the axial load or the spine load
or the vertical load.
So, there's none of that. I don't need
to have a strong core to do a leg press
or a hack squat. You don't need a heavy
brace. I can breathe through that. In
fact, I do breathe through my leg press.
I do not breathe during a repetition of
a squat because I'm bracing so hard.
What I'm going to do is one more set.
Um, and then that's all. And then
hamstring curls. Nothing exciting. Um,
but for you guys, I hope you enjoyed
that session.
Click like, subscribe, all those things.
Keep turning up please and thank you.
And I'll keep on educating you. If
there's anything particular that you
want to see, just let me know in the
comments section and I'll do my best to
educate you only on the things that I
know about because of course I don't
know everything. I know a lot about
lifting weights. I know a lot about what
got me to where I am as well as
strengthening the athletes that I've
strengthened.
And if you want answers on those things,
then I'm all yours. So, put it in the
comment section below. Hope you enjoyed
the session. Thank you to big him.